---
layout: post
title: "Reactive systems using Reactor"
date: 2016-11-15 09:00:00 -0600
categories: java
---
[Reactor][reactor] 3.x is a Java library for writing [reactive][manifesto]
applications using the [Reactive Streams][rs] standard. [Reactor Core][rc]
provides a reactive streams implementation similar in style to
[RxJava 2][rxjava2]. Because it is based on standard reactive streams, Reactor
can easily integrate with any other reactive streams library (particularly
RxJava 2). There are adapters available for RxJava 1 and the
[`CompleteableFuture`][compfut] API as well as conversions for the new JDK 9
[`Flow`][flow] reactive stream interfaces. Reactor also provides an [IPC][ipc]
API for implementing reactive streams systems for general networking and off-JVM
communication. The main implementation of the IPC API is [Reactor Netty][rn]
which provides TCP, UDP, and HTTP DSLs. There are other modules in the works,
but Reactor 3.x is still under heavy development.

## Reactive Streams
Reactive streams are an API and pattern to handling streams of data
asynchronously and non-blocking while providing backpressure to stream
publishers so that stream subscribers do not get overwhelmed and require
maintaining internal buffers or cause blocking. The reactive streams
standard provides the minimal API to support this style of architecture
which is also being introduced in Java 9.

The main classes in this API are `Publisher<T>` and `Subscriber<T>`. A
`Publisher` is the source of events `T` in the stream, and a `Subscriber` is
the destination for those events. The basic idea of how these classes
interact is that a `Subscriber` subscribes to a `Publisher` which invokes
`Subscriber::onSubscribe(Subscription)`. When the `Subscriber` is ready to
start handling events, it signals this via a request to that `Subscription`
Upon receiving this signal, the `Publisher` begins to invoke
`Subscriber::onNext(T)` for each event `T`. This continues until either
completion of the stream (`Subscriber::onComplete()`) or an error occurs
during processing (`Subscriber::onError(Throwable)`).

## Reactor
Clearly, the reactive streams API is too low level to make practical use of it
in reactive applications. This is where Reactor Core (or RxJava) come into play
by providing a DSL for handling these streams. Reactor provides two main types
of publishers: [`Flux`][flux] and [`Mono`][mono]. A `Flux` is a general purpose
publisher that can contain an unbounded number of events. A `Mono` is a specialized
publisher that can contain only zero or one events. For a hands-on introduction
to these classes, take a look at [this GitHub project][handson] and try to
implement all the test stubs. We'll go over some of the tests below.

## Trying Out Reactor
As a neat way to get familiar with the Reactor Core API, we'll be implementing
the code necessary to pass these test stubs. These tests will cover `Flux`,
`Mono`, `Scheduler`, `StepVerifier`, and bridges to other APIs.

### Flux
Our first task is to create an empty `Flux`. Such a `Flux` will publish no events
and will immediately complete without error. `Flux` provides a static factory
method for creating such a `Flux`:

```java
Flux<String> emptyFlux() {
    return Flux.empty();
}
```

Our next task is to create a `Flux` that will stream through two strings and
complete. `Flux` provides another static factory method for this:

```java
Flux<String> fooBarFluxFromValues() {
    return Flux.just("foo", "bar");
}
```

Next, we need to create a `Flux` from a standard `List` collection. Again, we
can use a factory method:

```java
Flux<String> fooBarFluxFromList() {
    return Flux.fromIterable(Arrays.asList("foo", "bar"));
}
```

Next, we want a `Flux` that errs immediately instead of completing normally.
Did you guess that there's a factory method for it?

```java
Flux<String> errorFlux() {
    return Flux.error(new IllegalStateException());
}
```

Finally, we start to get a little interesting by creating a `Flux` that emits
the sequence 0 through 9, and each emission should be spaced out by 100 ms.
Here we'll use the `Flux.interval()` factory and limit it to only 10 items:

```java
Flux<Long> counter() {
    return Flux.interval(Duration.ofMillis(100))
               .take(10);
}
```

### Mono
The next test class revolves around basic `Mono` APIs. As with `Flux`, our
first task is to create an empty `Mono`. This `Mono` will complete immediately
as with an empty `Flux`:

```java
Mono<String> emptyMono() {
    return Mono.empty();
}
```

Next, we want to create a `Mono` that never signals an event, completion, or
error. This is available through a factory method:

```java
Mono<String> monoWithNoSignal() {
    return Mono.never();
}
```

The next task is to create a `Mono` with a single value. This is available
through a similar factory as `Flux.just(T...)`:

```java
Mono<String> fooMono() {
    return Mono.just("foo");
}
```

Finally, we create a `Mono` that does not emit any events but instead emits
an error right away. This works the same as `Flux.error(Throwable)`:

```java
Mono<String> errorMono() {
    return Mono.error(new IllegalStateException());
}
```

### Transforming Streams
Now that we know the basics of creating `Flux` and `Mono` publishers, let's do
something with them. There are two styles of mapping events to new objects:
synchronously and asynchronously. The synchronous style is rather simple and
works the same with both `Flux` and `Mono`:

```java
Mono<String> toUpperCase(Mono<String> mono) {
    return mono.map(String::toUpperCase);
}
```

However, suppose that our mapped function is asynchronous or could be made
asynchronous in order to prevent blocking in our stream. In this style mapping
function, instead of returning the same object type, we wrap it into a `Mono`
so that the computed value can be taken when ready:

```java
Flux<String> toUpperCase(Flux<String> flux) {
    return flux.flatMap(s -> Mono.just(s.toUpperCase()));
}
```

But wait, that's still executing `s.toUpperCase()` right away! What if we want
to wait until it's consumed to make the computation? We can wrap the execution
into a deferred publisher:

```java
Flux<String> asyncToUpperCase(Flux<String> flux) {
    return flux.flatMap(s -> Mono.defer(() -> Mono.just(s.toUpperCase())));
}
```

### Combining Streams
Suppose we have two streams and we wish to interleave their events together
into a single stream. We can merge them like so:

```java
Flux<String> interleave(Flux<String> flux1, Flux<String> flux2) {
    return flux1.mergeWith(flux2);
}
```

Now suppose we wish to combine two streams, but we want events from one stream
to all happen before events from the other stream. We can concatenate them:

```java
Flux<String> combine(Flux<String> flux1, Flux<String> flux2) {
    return flux1.concatWith(flux2);
}
```

Both of these operations can also be performed on `Mono` publishers.

### Handling Errors
One of the things that really make reactive streams more useful than the Java 8
streams is the ability to specify error handling at various levels. For example,
suppose we have a `Mono` that we wish to provide a default value to return in
case of an error:

```java
Mono<String> provideDefaultForError(Mono<String> mono) {
    return mono.otherwiseReturn("error string");
}
```

Perhaps on error we wish to substitute our stream with a different stream:

```java
Flux<String> provideFallbackStreamForError(Flux<String> flux) {
    return flux.onErrorResumeWith(e -> Flux.just("foo", "bar"));
}
```

### Other Operations
Suppose we have a `Person` class:

```java
public class Person {
    public final String firstName;
    public final String lastName;
    public Person(String firstName, String lastName) {
        this.firstName = firstName;
        this.lastName = lastName;
    }
}
```

Now suppose we have two streams of data, one corresponding to first names, and
the other corresponding to last names. We can zip these streams together to
form a new stream:

```java
Flux<Person> zipIntoPersons(Flux<String> firstNames, Flux<String> lastNames) {
    return Flux.zip(firstNames, lastNames)
               .map(pair -> new Person(pair.getT1(), pair.getT2()));
}
```

Suppose we have two `Mono` streams and we want to get an item from whichever one
can provide it faster:

```java
Mono<String> getFasterStream(Mono<String> mono1, Mono<String> mono2) {
    return mono1.or(mono2);
}
```

In a similar situation, suppose we have two `Flux` streams and want to use
whichever stream can begin emitting items first:

```java
Flux<String> getFasterStream(Flux<String> flux1, Flux<String> flux2) {
    return flux1.firstEmittingWith(flux2);
}
```

Finally, we can take a `Flux` and return a `Mono<Void>` that is only used to
indicate when the stream has completed or erred:

```java
Mono<Void> getCompletionOf(Flux<String> flux) {
    return flux.then();
}
```

### Reactive/Blocking Conversions
Suppose we have a `Mono` or `Flux` that we wish to make a blocking call to
obtain values from for use in a synchronous API. Using a `Mono`, we do:

```java
String getValue(Mono<String> mono) {
    return mono.block();
}
```

Using a `Flux`, we do:

```java
Iterable<String> getValues(Flux<String> flux) {
    return flux.toIterable();
}
```

Next, we go in the other direction. Suppose we wish to convert a collection
into a `Flux`. Perhaps obtaining the collection is expensive, so we defer
looking it up until necessary. In this case, we'll also specify a
`Scheduler` so that we don't block our main thread. This scenario is a fast
subscriber but slow publisher:

```java
Flux<Person> asyncPersonLookup(PersonRepository repository) {
    return Flux.defer(() -> Flux.fromIterable(repository.findAll()))
               .subscribeOn(Schedulers.elastic());
}
```

In the reverse scenario, suppose we have a fast publisher and a slow subscriber
such as storing a record in a database. Using a `Flux` for the publisher, we
can publish on a separate `Scheduler`. Since we'll be saving data, we'll
just return a `Mono<Void>` to indicate when the stream has finished
processing:

```java
Mono<Void> asyncSavePersons(Flux<Person> flux, PersonRepository repository) {
    return flux.publishOn(Schedulers.parallel())
               .doOnNext(repository::save)
               .then();
}
```

[reactor]: https://projectreactor.io/
[manifesto]: http://www.reactivemanifesto.org/
[rs]: http://www.reactive-streams.org/
[rxjava2]: https://github.com/ReactiveX/RxJava/tree/2.x
[compfut]: http://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/concurrent/CompletableFuture.html
[flow]: http://gee.cs.oswego.edu/dl/jsr166/dist/docs/java/util/concurrent/Flow.html
[rc]: https://github.com/reactor/reactor-core
[ipc]: https://github.com/reactor/reactor-ipc
[rn]: https://github.com/reactor/reactor-netty
[handson]: https://github.com/reactor/lite-rx-api-hands-on
[flux]: http://projectreactor.io/core/docs/api/reactor/core/publisher/Flux.html
[mono]: http://projectreactor.io/core/docs/api/reactor/core/publisher/Mono.html
